Now that we've got our feet wet and covered the basics of Cloud9,
let's take a little bit of a deeper look at some of the more
advanced functionality available to us.
The Cloud9 user interface is quite configurable,
and you can customize your display and even make ad hoc
displays to display different blocks of code from different
files at the exact same time.
There are three distinct dimensions within the
Cloud9 user interface for reading, writing, and debugging code,
which are called editors, tabs, and panes.
The editor is the section of the IDE that allows you to code, run
terminal sessions, and even change the IDE settings.
The editor essentially encapsulates the entire Cloud9 user interface.
Within the editor, we have tabs.
Cloud9, similar to most web browsers,
can have multiple tabs that enable you to quickly navigate
between code files with a single click.
Users can add and remove files from their active tabs by
selecting them in the left‑hand file navigation, shown
earlier. You might be wondering,
what if I need to view multiple files at the same time?
Well,
this can easily be accomplished by arranging files within a concept called
panes in Cloud9. Panes are visual groupings of files that can be created and
arranged arbitrarily. With panes, you can create a visual arrangement of
files and tabs within your editor to view multiple blocks of your code from
different files simultaneously.
Aside from the visual aesthetics of the IDE, knowing in more detail how to run
and debug code will better equip you to create solutions within Cloud9 more
easily. When it comes to running and debugging,
we have three important concepts to consider,
which are builders, runners, and debuggers. You can probably
get away with using Cloud9 initially without having a solid
grasp of these concepts; however, when creating larger solutions in Cloud9,
you'll quickly learn that knowing how to leverage these features
will unlock a much better user coding experience.
Builders contain the instructions that enable Cloud9 to
build your project's files before execution.
Cloud9 has builders that work out of the box for most common
programming languages that require little to no customization to
work for various standard projects.
However, if you have a project that requires custom build scripts,
you'll likely need to configure your project's JSON builder to
get things up and running properly. A runner is used to run and
potentially debug your code in Cloud9.
With runners,
you can specify the programming language of the application and custom
runtime configurations to meet your needs. With runners,
you can specify the working directory, root file,
debugging port number, and environment variables needed to get your
application running directly in your browser.
A debugger can be created by a runner.
A debugger attaches to a runner and unlocks Cloud9's
debugging features for the user, as shown in the last demo.
Using debuggers,
you can view local variables and periodically pause and step
through your code during execution to better diagnosis issues
and build resilient solutions.
The debugger window has four primary commands that will allow you to
control the execution flow of a debugged program.
These four commands are fairly universal across standard IDEs,
and understanding the distinction between each of them will better enable you
to rapidly navigate through executed code to debug issues.
The Play button, as I like to call it, is the Resume command.
When using this command,
it will indefinitely execute the program until one of two things
happen, either another breakpoint or exception is hit, or the
program finishes its execution entirely.
The Step Over command will step over the current line.
This command should be used when you want to stay in the current file being
debugged, as it will not go inside of a function call.
The Step Into command will advance app execution directly
into the next line of code being executed.
If the current line of code being debugged calls an external function,
it will open that file and go inside of that function call. If you've
narrowed down a bug in your code to a specific line,
you should often use the Step Into function to get a better understanding of what is occurring during that executed line.